docs/tutorials.rst, before:

Tutorials
=========

This section provides step-by-step tutorials to help you get started with Burbuja.

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

Prerequisites
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Burbuja installed and working (see :doc:`getting_started`) along with all required, recommended, and optional dependencies, including:

  - CuPy

.. note::

    We are assuming that you have installed Burbuja via Pip, thus allowing you to use it as a command in the terminal. If you have installed via source, then you will need to provide the path to burbuja.py, e.g. "python ~/Burbuja/Burbuja/burbuja.py".

Tutorial 1: Basic Bubble Detection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This tutorials walks you through detecting a bubble within a simple PDB file.

You may start by downloading the following files, which contain a solvated trypsin/
benzamidine system *with* and *without* bubbles, respectively:

:download:`tryp_ben_bubble.pdb <media/tryp_ben_bubble.pdb>`

:download:`tryp_ben_no_bubble.pdb <media/tryp_ben_no_bubble.pdb>`

.. figure:: media/tb_bubble.png
   :align:  center
   
   Figure 1: This solvated box containing the trypsin/benzamidine system has been improperly solvated and contains a bubble.
   
.. figure:: media/tb_no_bubble.png
   :align:  center
   
   Figure 2: In contrast to Figure 1, this trypsin/benzamidine system contains no bubbles.
   
Let us start by seeing whether Burbuja detects bubbles in these structures:

.. code-block:: bash

    burbuja tryp_ben_bubble.pdb
    
The output should indicate the time to complete the calculation, and confirm the existence of a bubble. Next:

.. code-block:: bash

    burbuja tryp_ben_no_bubble.pdb
    
No bubble should be detected.

Using Burbuja from the command line can be that easy!


Tutorial 2: Bubble Shape and Size
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Next, for the structure that has a bubble, we will detect its shape and size. This is done with the '-d' argument.

.. code-block:: bash

    burbuja tryp_ben_bubble.pdb -d
    
This time, the program prints the bubble volume, and writes a file named 'tryp_ben_bubble_bubble_frame_0.dx', which you may load into a molecular visualizer such as VMD or NGLView.

.. figure:: media/tb_bubble_location_size.png
   :align:  center
   
   Figure 3: Bubble size and location are shown in red by visualizing the resulting DX file.

Tutorial 3: Trajectories, Alternative File Formats, and GPU Acceleration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In this tutorial, we will start by detecting bubbles in a trajectory. Please download the following files:

:download:`tryp_ben.prmtop <media/tryp_ben.prmtop>`

:download:`tb_traj.dcd <media/tb_traj.dcd>`

Burbuja allows one to load structures in a variety of formats, basically anything supported by MDTraj (https://mdtraj.org/). In this case, we will load a prmtop/dcd file pair to detect bubbles in the trajectory:

.. code-block:: bash

    burbuja tb_traj.dcd -t tryp_ben.prmtop -d

This command will print out the volume of the bubble for each frame, where detected.

.. note::

    If the previous command were run without the '-d' argument, it would simply detect whether a bubble was found anywhere in the trajectory.
    
Next, let's try GPU acceleration (If you have installed CuPy) with the '-c' argument:

.. code-block:: bash

    burbuja tb_traj.dcd -t tryp_ben.prmtop -d -c

The command should finish much more quickly.

Tutorial 4: Using the Burbuja API
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This tutorial may also be run with the accompanying Jupyter Notebook located at: ~/Burbuja/Burbuja/jupyter_notebooks/api_tutorial.ipynb within the Github repository: (https://github.com/Abrahammc90/Burbuja.git).

The need may arise to use Burbuja from within a Python script (for a workflow, for instance). Hence why an API is available for using Burbuja. Complete the steps of this notebook to see examples of how to use Burbuja's API.

NOTE: You will need to install Burbuja and its dependencies, as well as NGLView:

.. code-block:: bash
    
    # Run this in the terminal
    pip install nglview
    
.. code-block:: python

    # Run this and all subsequent code in Python
    # paths - modify as needed
    hsp90_structure_path = "~/Burbuja/Burbuja/tests/data/hsp90.pdb"
    tryp_ben_dcd_path = "~/Burbuja/Burbuja/tests/data/tb_traj.dcd"
    tryp_ben_prmtop_path = "~/Burbuja/Burbuja/tests/data/tryp_ben.prmtop"
    # Imports and other preliminaries
    import os
    import time
    import mdtraj
    import nglview
    import Burbuja.burbuja as burbuja
    hsp90_structure_path = os.path.expanduser(hsp90_structure_path)
    tryp_ben_dcd_path = os.path.expanduser(tryp_ben_dcd_path)
    tryp_ben_prmtop_path = os.path.expanduser(tryp_ben_prmtop_path)
    
Tutorial 4.1: Simple Bubble Detection
-------------------------------------

First, we will use the API to simply detect whether a bubble exists in a HSP90 solvated structure.

.. code-block:: python

    hsp90_contains_bubble = burbuja.has_bubble(hsp90_structure_path)
    print("HSP90 structure contains bubble:", hsp90_contains_bubble)
    
No bubble is found in this structure.

Tutorial 4.2: Bubble Detection on a Trajectory
----------------------------------------------

Next, we will see how to load a MDtraj trajectory object and run it through Burbuja with some alternative settings, like GPU acceleration.

.. code-block:: python

    traj_structure = mdtraj.load(tryp_ben_dcd_path, top=tryp_ben_prmtop_path)
    traj_contains_bubble = burbuja.has_bubble(traj_structure)
    print("Trajectory contains bubble:", traj_contains_bubble)

Aha! We have found a bubble. Let's see where and how big...

The "dx_filename_base" argument defines the base name for the DX files, and indicates to Burbuja that we want to write the bubbles to DX.

.. code-block:: python

    dx_filename_base = "traj_bubble"
    traj_contains_bubble = burbuja.has_bubble(traj_structure, dx_filename_base=dx_filename_base)

It looks like Burbuja wrote 6 frames. Let's load them and visualize the resulting bubbles.

.. code-block:: python

    view_list = []
    # Must be reloaded for visualization because Burbuja changes the MDTraj object
    new_traj_structure = mdtraj.load(tryp_ben_dcd_path, top=tryp_ben_prmtop_path)
    for i in range(6):
        dx_filename = f"{dx_filename_base}_frame_{i}.dx"
        traj_structure_this_frame = new_traj_structure[i]
        view = nglview.show_mdtraj(traj_structure_this_frame)
        view.add_component(dx_filename)
        view.clear_representations()
        view.component_1.clear_representations()
        view.add_cartoon("protein")
        view.add_licorice("water")
        view.component_1.add_surface(opacity=0.25, wireframe=False, color="red", isolevel=0.5)
        view_list.append(view)
    for i, view in enumerate(view_list):
        print(f"Iteration: {i}")
        display(view)
        
You should be able to see the bubble locations highlighted in red.

If we wanted the bubble detection to go faster, we could use GPU acceleration with CuPy:

.. code-block:: python

    dx_filename_base = "traj_bubble"
    time_start = time.time()
    traj_contains_bubble = burbuja.has_bubble(traj_structure, dx_filename_base=dx_filename_base, use_cupy=True)
    time_end = time.time()
    elapsed_time = time_end - time_start
    print(f"Bubble detection completed in {elapsed_time:.2f} seconds.")
    
Tutorial 4.3. Accessing Bubble Objects
--------------------------------------

If you want more low-level access to information Burbuja obtains about structures, the `burbuja()` function returns a list of `Bubble` objects that have additional attributes and methods for analysis.

.. code-block:: python

    from Burbuja.modules.base import DEFAULT_MINIMUM_BUBBLE_FRACTION
    bubbles = burbuja.burbuja(traj_structure)
    for i, bubble in enumerate(bubbles):
        if bubble.total_bubble_volume > DEFAULT_MINIMUM_BUBBLE_FRACTION * bubble.total_system_volume:
            print(f"Frame: {i}")
            print(f"Bubble detected with volume: {bubble.total_bubble_volume:.3f} nm^3.")
            print(f"System volume: {bubble.total_system_volume:.3f} nm^3.")
            bubble_percentage = 100.0 * (bubble.total_bubble_volume / bubble.total_system_volume)
            print(f"Bubbles occupy {bubble_percentage:.3f} % of the system, by volume.")

Commit message:

Updated RTD documentation for contiguous bubbles.

docs/tutorials.rst, after:

Tutorials
=========

This section provides step-by-step tutorials to help you get started with Burbuja.

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

Prerequisites
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Burbuja installed and working (see :doc:`getting_started`) along with all required, recommended, and optional dependencies, including:

  - CuPy

.. note::

    We are assuming that you have installed Burbuja via Pip, thus allowing you to use it as a command in the terminal. If you have installed via source, then you will need to provide the path to burbuja.py, e.g. "python ~/Burbuja/Burbuja/burbuja.py".

Tutorial 1: Basic Bubble Detection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This tutorials walks you through detecting a bubble within a simple PDB file.

You may start by downloading the following files, which contain a solvated trypsin/
benzamidine system *with* and *without* bubbles, respectively:

:download:`tryp_ben_bubble.pdb <media/tryp_ben_bubble.pdb>`

:download:`tryp_ben_no_bubble.pdb <media/tryp_ben_no_bubble.pdb>`

.. figure:: media/tb_bubble.png
   :align:  center
   
   Figure 1: This solvated box containing the trypsin/benzamidine system has been improperly solvated and contains a bubble.
   
.. figure:: media/tb_no_bubble.png
   :align:  center
   
   Figure 2: In contrast to Figure 1, this trypsin/benzamidine system contains no bubbles.
   
Let us start by seeing whether Burbuja detects bubbles in these structures:

.. code-block:: bash

    burbuja tryp_ben_bubble.pdb
    
The output should indicate the time to complete the calculation, and confirm the existence of a bubble. Next:

.. code-block:: bash

    burbuja tryp_ben_no_bubble.pdb
    
No bubble should be detected.

Using Burbuja from the command line can be that easy!


Tutorial 2: Bubble Shape and Size
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Next, for the structure that has a bubble, we will detect its shape and size. This is done with the '-d' argument.

.. code-block:: bash

    burbuja tryp_ben_bubble.pdb -d
    
This time, the program prints several bubble volumes, and writes several files, the first one named 'tryp_ben_bubble_bubble_frame_0.dx', which you may load into a molecular visualizer such as VMD or NGLView.

.. figure:: media/tb_bubble_location_size.png
   :align:  center
   
   Figure 3: Bubble size and location are shown in red by visualizing the resulting DX files.

Tutorial 3: Trajectories, Alternative File Formats, and GPU Acceleration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In this tutorial, we will start by detecting bubbles in a trajectory. Please download the following files:

:download:`tryp_ben.prmtop <media/tryp_ben.prmtop>`

:download:`tb_traj.dcd <media/tb_traj.dcd>`

Burbuja allows one to load structures in a variety of formats, basically anything supported by MDTraj (https://mdtraj.org/). In this case, we will load a prmtop/dcd file pair to detect bubbles in the trajectory:

.. code-block:: bash

    burbuja tb_traj.dcd -t tryp_ben.prmtop -d

This command will print out the volumes of the bubbles for each frame, where detected.

.. note::

    If the previous command were run without the '-d' argument, it would simply detect whether a bubble was found anywhere in the trajectory.
    
Next, let's try GPU acceleration (If you have installed CuPy) with the '-c' argument:

.. code-block:: bash

    burbuja tb_traj.dcd -t tryp_ben.prmtop -d -c

The command should finish much more quickly.

Tutorial 4: Using the Burbuja API
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This tutorial may also be run with the accompanying Jupyter Notebook located at: ~/Burbuja/Burbuja/jupyter_notebooks/api_tutorial.ipynb within the Github repository: (https://github.com/Abrahammc90/Burbuja.git).

The need may arise to use Burbuja from within a Python script (for a workflow, for instance). Hence why an API is available for using Burbuja. Complete the steps of this notebook to see examples of how to use Burbuja's API.

NOTE: You will need to install Burbuja and its dependencies, as well as NGLView:

.. code-block:: bash
    
    # Run this in the terminal
    pip install nglview
    
.. code-block:: python

    # Run this and all subsequent code in Python
    # paths - modify as needed
    hsp90_structure_path = "~/Burbuja/Burbuja/tests/data/hsp90.pdb"
    tryp_ben_dcd_path = "~/Burbuja/Burbuja/tests/data/tb_traj.dcd"
    tryp_ben_prmtop_path = "~/Burbuja/Burbuja/tests/data/tryp_ben.prmtop"
    # Imports and other preliminaries
    import os
    import time
    import mdtraj
    import nglview
    import Burbuja.burbuja as burbuja
    hsp90_structure_path = os.path.expanduser(hsp90_structure_path)
    tryp_ben_dcd_path = os.path.expanduser(tryp_ben_dcd_path)
    tryp_ben_prmtop_path = os.path.expanduser(tryp_ben_prmtop_path)
    
Tutorial 4.1: Simple Bubble Detection
-------------------------------------

First, we will use the API to simply detect whether a bubble exists in a HSP90 solvated structure.

.. code-block:: python

    hsp90_contains_bubble = burbuja.has_bubble(hsp90_structure_path)
    print("HSP90 structure contains bubble:", hsp90_contains_bubble)
    
No bubble is found in this structure.

Tutorial 4.2: Bubble Detection on a Trajectory
----------------------------------------------

Next, we will see how to load a MDtraj trajectory object and run it through Burbuja with some alternative settings, like GPU acceleration.

.. code-block:: python

    traj_structure = mdtraj.load(tryp_ben_dcd_path, top=tryp_ben_prmtop_path)
    traj_contains_bubble = burbuja.has_bubble(traj_structure)
    print("Trajectory contains bubble:", traj_contains_bubble)

Aha! We have found a bubble. Let's see where and how big...

The "dx_filename_base" argument defines the base name for the DX files, and indicates to Burbuja that we want to write the bubbles to DX.

.. code-block:: python

    dx_filename_base = "traj_bubble"
    traj_contains_bubble = burbuja.has_bubble(traj_structure, dx_filename_base=dx_filename_base)

It looks like Burbuja wrote 6 frames. Let's load them and visualize the resulting bubbles.

.. code-block:: python

    view_list = []
    # Must be reloaded for visualization because Burbuja changes the MDTraj object
    new_traj_structure = mdtraj.load(tryp_ben_dcd_path, top=tryp_ben_prmtop_path)
    for i in range(6):
        dx_filename = f"{dx_filename_base}_frame_{i}_bubble_0.dx"
        traj_structure_this_frame = new_traj_structure[i]
        view = nglview.show_mdtraj(traj_structure_this_frame)
        view.add_component(dx_filename)
        view.clear_representations()
        view.component_1.clear_representations()
        view.add_cartoon("protein")
        view.add_licorice("water")
        view.component_1.add_surface(opacity=0.25, wireframe=False, color="red", isolevel=0.5)
        view_list.append(view)
    for i, view in enumerate(view_list):
        print(f"Iteration: {i}")
        display(view)
        
You should be able to see the bubble locations highlighted in red.

If we wanted the bubble detection to go faster, we could use GPU acceleration with CuPy:

.. code-block:: python

    dx_filename_base = "traj_bubble"
    time_start = time.time()
    traj_contains_bubble = burbuja.has_bubble(traj_structure, dx_filename_base=dx_filename_base, use_cupy=True)
    time_end = time.time()
    elapsed_time = time_end - time_start
    print(f"Bubble detection completed in {elapsed_time:.2f} seconds.")
    
Tutorial 4.3. Accessing Bubble Objects
--------------------------------------

If you want more low-level access to information Burbuja obtains about structures, the `burbuja()` function returns a list of `Bubble` objects that have additional attributes and methods for analysis.

.. code-block:: python

    from Burbuja.modules.base import DEFAULT_MINIMUM_BUBBLE_FRACTION
    bubbles = burbuja.burbuja(traj_structure)
    for i, bubble in enumerate(bubbles):
        if bubble.total_bubble_volume > DEFAULT_MINIMUM_BUBBLE_FRACTION * bubble.total_system_volume:
            print(f"Frame: {i}")
            print(f"Bubble detected with volume: {bubble.total_bubble_volume:.3f} nm^3.")
            print(f"System volume: {bubble.total_system_volume:.3f} nm^3.")
            bubble_percentage = 100.0 * (bubble.total_bubble_volume / bubble.total_system_volume)
            print(f"Bubbles occupy {bubble_percentage:.3f} % of the system, by volume.")
